---
title: Health & Illness | SOC 4371.HN1
layout: page
---

#### Health & Illness

#### Instructor: Richard Scotch

#### SOC4371.HN1

Medicine is a social science, as much as it is a biological science.
Who gets sick, what they do about it, and what kind of treatment they
receive are the result of an interplay of behavioral, cultural, and
social forces. In this course we will examine how behavioral, social,
and cultural factors affect health and illness. We will also address a
number of ethic issues in health care decision making. This class will
involve lectures by the instructor, presentations on the readings by
students, seminar discussion, and occasional guest lectures and media
presentations.

In this course, students will learn about 1) social and demographic
factors associated with health and illness, including social class,
race/ethnicity, gender, and education; 2) how social scientists have
interpreted health and illness behavior; 3) the nature of American
health professions and institutions, and how these professions and
institutions are responding to recent economic, social, political, and
technological trends; and 4) ethical values and dilemmas found within
the American health care system.

Anticipated course requirements tentatively include:

  * 10-12 short quizzes covering material from the assigned readings
(40% of the final course grade)

  * Four take home essays of approximately four pages each (40% of the
final course grade)

  * One 5-8 page paper and class presentation dealing with a social
and/or ethical issue in health care (20% of the final course grade).

While there is no formal grade for class participation, regular
attendance and participation in class discussion (or lack thereof)
will be taken into account in determining the final course grade.
