---
title: Physics II | PHYS 2422.HN1
layout: page
---

#### Physics II

#### Instructor: Yuri Gartstein

#### PHYS2422.HN1

This is a general physics calculus-based course on basic notions of
electricity, magnetism and electromagnetic waves. The course is a more
“intense” version of PHYS2326 in terms of its pace, scope, difficulty
of the problems and the calculus to be used. While the math is a
natural and necessary ingredient, it is the physical content and
concepts that are at the heart of the course. To a large extent, the
physical content is covered in the corresponding chapters of
well-known standard textbooks quoted below. Lecture materials and
other recommended books should be helpful for topics beyond “standard”
and where vector calculus is used. In teaching this course, we pursue
few interrelated goals for students: (1) To learn specific laws of
electromagnetism and their applications, (2) To develop a
broad-physical-concepts view of these laws, (3) To appreciate
relationship between mathematics and physical reality and to become
comfortable with actually using math, (4) To strengthen generic
problem-solving skills.

Our focus will be not on "training" and "dry" learning of the
materials but on conceptual understanding and developing skills to
apply basic principles to actual problem solving. Lectures and problem
solving sessions will include examples of how to approach problems;
students are expected to spend as much as possible of their own time
on problems, quizzes, etc. Some of the stuff we will discuss would be
more for fun and inspiration than for an in-depth study.

Students in this class will:

  * Be able to explain basic notions of electric charges, currents,
    electromagnetic fields, forces and waves, and discuss them in the
    context of broad physical concepts like reality of physical
    fields, superposition principle and conservation of charge and
    energy.

  * Demonstrate how basic laws (Coulomb’s and Gauss’s in
    electrostatics, Biot-Savart and Ampere's in magnetostatics,
    Faraday’s and Lenz’s for time-dependent fields) can be applied to
    calculate electric and magnetic fields from the sources, and
    effects of electric and magnetic forces acting on charged
    particles and currents.

  * Analyze simple electric circuits (batteries, resistors,
    capacitors, and inductors) in direct-current and
    quasi-steady-state regimes.

  * Be able to understand the meaning of Maxwell equations and their
    consequences for the existence and propagation of electromagnetic
    waves.
